# Tick-TOC1 - Identifying Molecular Clocks
## Background
The behaviour and activity of animals, plants, and even bacteria is controlled by an internal timekeeper known as a **circadian clock**. This biochemical oscilllator has a steady rhythm and synchronises with fluctuating light levels. Even in the complete absence of light, our circadian clocks maintain an approximate 24 hour cycle. 

Identifying molecular clocks can help us better understand inherited disorders, such as **delayed sleep-phase syndrome**. The activity of these miniscule timepieces could also explain why heart attacks occur more often in the morning whereas asthma attacks are more common at night.

Given that so much of their activity is centred around solar time, molecular clocks are even more vital to the survival of plants. Each plant cell tracks time independently with just three regulatory genes (**LHY**, **CCA1**, and **TOC1**) involved in a negative-feedback loop. During the day, sunlight activates LHY and CCA1 transcription; in turn, these genes repress transcription of TOC1. As night falls, light levels dip and LHY and CCA1 are no longer upregulated. In the absence of repression, TOC1 is transcribed and promotes expression of LHY and CCA1. Each of these regulatory genes encode **transcription factors** that control expresion of many other genes by binding to **regulatory motifs** in their upstream regions.  

## Identification Techniques
A wet lab approach to identifying regulatory motifs is to create a DNA array (a collection of short DNA probe molecules attached to a silicone chip). Fluorecently labelled slices of the investigated genome are added to the array and bind to probes via complementary base pairing. The greater the expression of a gene, the greater the intensity of the fluorescent signal. Since an array may contain millions of probes, biologists can measure the expression of many genes in a single array experiment. For instance, in 2000, chronobiologist Steve Kay identified clock genes in thale cress (*Arabidopsis thaliana*) with a DNA array experiment that measured the expression of 8,000 genes. Other regulatory motifs, such as the **NF-kB binding site** in Drosophila genomes, are not as well-conserved and therefore are far more elusive in a DNA sequence. Computational arrays can be used to identify such motifs. 

One difficulty with using a computational method is that, unlike DnaA boxes which cluster together into clumps, regulatory motifs are scattered throughout the genome. Motifs only occur at least once (with variations and mutations) in many different genoke regions.  As a result, the [algorithm designed to locate DnaA boxes](https://github.com/ClarissaPereira/Finding-Ori/blob/master/Final%20DnaA%20Box%20Finder.py) in the origin of replication is inadequate at modelling the biological problem of regulatory motif finding. 

[The algorithm notes](https://github.com/ClarissaPereira/Tick-TOC1/blob/master/Algorithm%20Notes.md) go into much greater detail about the various algorithms in this repo that were implemented to better model this biological problem and improve the efficiency of a regulatory motif search 

## Application
The bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis is responsible for over a million deaths each year, particularly in [LEDCs such as India](https://curiositykilledthecation.wordpress.com/2017/08/18/serology-in-mumbai-part-ii/). Unlike many pathogens, M. tuberculosis is particularly successful at infecting humans because it can persist dormant in the body for up to decades without causing disease only to suddenly reactivate. A staggering estimated one-third of the world population has a latent MTB infection - making sudden TB outbreaks and epidemics difficult to control. 

Understanding the regulatory networks which allow M. tuberculosis to shut down almost all gene expression and form protective, metabolically dormant spores is a pressing challenge. Killing the host would not help the M. tuberculosis to proliferate as it relies on human respiration to infect new hosts. Hypoxia (oxygen shortage) inside the body indicates that the lungs are not working well; this triggers dormancy in the bacterium, allowing the infected person's lungs to recover enough to potentially spread the disease in the future. Identifying the transcription factor that “senses” the shortage of oxygen and starts a genetic program that affects the expression of many genes, allowing MTB to adapt to hypoxia, would enable biologists to predict and even control TB epidemics.

This vital transcription factor is the **dormancy survival regulator (DosR)**. A DNA array testing gene expression in hypoxic conditions identified 25 genes most affected by hypoxia; of these 25, the upstream regions of ten genes have been processed using the [randomised motif search](https://github.com/ClarissaPereira/Tick-TOC1/blob/master/randomised%20motif%20search.py) and [Gibb's sampler](https://github.com/ClarissaPereira/Tick-TOC1/blob/master/gibbs%20sampler.py) algorithms. The identified motifs ('GACTTCAGGCCC', 'GACCCGCGGCCC', 'GACTTCCGGCGG', 'GAATCCCGGACC', 'GACCGACGTCCC', 'GACCTTCGGCCC', 'GACTTCTGTCCC', 'GACTTTCGGCCC', 'GACTAACGGCCC', 'GACCGCCTGGCC') have a low mismatch score of 24 and the median motif **GACTTCCGGCCC**. 

Comparison with [literature](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1992516/) reveals this 12-mer motif to be an accurate segment of the larger identified 20-mer motif TT[C/G]GG**GACT[T/A]TAGTCCC[G/C]** AA. The published, experimentally-identified motif and the motif identified by the algorithms in this repo have just four  mismatches between them.
